Add draft account-registration spec (#435)
ircv3/ircv3-specifications: extensions/register.md

copyrights:
  -
    name: "Ed Kellett"
    period: "2020"
    email: "e@kellett.im"
  -
    name: "Val Lorentz"
    period: "2021"
    email: "progval+ircv3@progval.net"
---

## Motivation

The lack of a standardized way to register an account has been a source of frustration for many participants
for several years.

This isn't the first attempt to fix it. Unlike the withdrawn `ACC` proposal, this effort aims to be more
appealing to implementors by being severely restricted in scope. The only register-verify flows supported
are those already in use in the wild. The authors hope that this stripped-down solution will serve as the
basis for future organic expansion.

### Capability

This specification adds the `draft/register` capability, whose presence signifies that the server
accepts the `REGISTER` command.

The capability has an optional value, a comma-separated list of key-value pairs; the format is intended
to follow the precedent set by [the multiline draft][multiline].

The `draft/register` capability SHOULD NOT be requested. Servers MAY `NAK` any such request. The
`REGISTER` command MUST be accepted regardless of any attempt to negotiate or disable the capability.

> The defined keys are:
> 
>  * `before-connect` - if present, indicates the server supports early registration, so it
>    MUST NOT use `FAIL REGISTER COMPLETE_CONNECTION_REQUIRED`
>  * `email-required` - if present, registrations require a valid email address to process
> 
> ### Commands
> 
>     REGISTER {<email> | "*"} <password>

Reviewer: Thoughts on

```suggestion
The defined keys are:

 * `before-connect` - if present, indicates the server supports early registration, so it
   MUST NOT use `FAIL REGISTER COMPLETE_CONNECTION_REQUIRED`
 * `verify` - if present, registrations require verification to proceed
 * `verify-email` - if present, verification can be done via email
 * `verify-tel` - if present, verification can be done via telephone

### Commands

    REGISTER {verify-mean=<verify-value> | "*"} <password>
```

?

It'd allow something like

```
S: CAP * LS :register=before-connect,verify,verify-email,verify-tel
C: REGISTER tel=+33612345678 :a very secure password
```

Vendor verification means could be added like so:

```
S: CAP * LS :register=before-connect,verify,verify-email,vendor/verify-matrix
C: REGISTER vendor/matrix=@freenode_pinkieval:matrix.org :though this should be strictly checked
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should try to make this spec as generic as ACC was.

Reviewer 3: I agree with @emersion. I'll add a requirement that clients should ignore unknown keys, so future specification can extend this one by adding keys.

while using a nick that is not available as a new account's name
(for example, because someone already registered it).

The server MUST NOT send this response before the client sent a `NICK` command.

The client MAY try registering again later.
Clients should not automatically retry immediately without changing their nickname
or waiting.

    FAIL REGISTER ALREADY_REGISTERED <account> <message>
    FAIL VERIFY ALREADY_REGISTERED <account> <message>

Sent by the server is the client is already authenticated.

    FAIL REGISTER WEAK_PASSWORD <account> <message>

Sent by the server if the password is considered too weak.

The client MAY try registering again.

    FAIL REGISTER UNACCEPTABLE_PASSWORD <account> <message>

Sent by the server if the password is invalid for any reason other than weakness.

The client MAY try registering again.

    FAIL REGISTER INVALID_EMAIL <account> <message>

Sent by the server if it cannot send emails to the provided address.

    FAIL REGISTER UNACCEPTABLE_EMAIL <account> <message>

Sent by the server if the email address is valid, but not available for account registration.

    FAIL REGISTER COMPLETE_CONNECTION_REQUIRED

>     FAIL VERIFY COMPLETE_CONNECTION_REQUIRED

Reviewer 4: You'll need the `<message>` param on the end of these to match the std replies format.

Sent by the server if the client sent a `REGISTER` command before connection registration.
The server MUST NOT sent these replies if it advertizes the `before-connect` key of the
`draft/register` capability.

    FAIL VERIFY INVALID_CODE <account> <message>

Sent by the server if the `<code>` in the `VERIFY` command is invalid or expired.

    FAIL REGISTER TEMPORARILY_UNAVAILABLE <account> <message>
    FAIL VERIFY TEMPORARILY_UNAVAILABLE <account> <message>

Sent by the server if the `REGISTER`/`VERIFY` commands are temporarily unavailable.

# Client considerations

This section is non-normative.

Passwords are opaque byte strings.
It is recommended for them to be valid UTF-8;

> or authentication may be impossible later (eg. with SASL PLAIN).

Reviewer 5: Pure pedantry: I don't think SASL PLAIN would have any problems here, since everything gets base64-encoded. The issue is more with being able to pass them easily to NickServ (e.g., to change the password).

I think a warning about password length may be in order? I've been imposing a cap of 300 bytes to ensure that passwords fit comfortably into IRC lines (it's theoretically possible that someone could submit a passphrase through this framework that gets truncated in other contexts). And although I haven't been validating this until now, it might also be worth checking that passphrases are acceptable as non-final IRC parameters (nonempty, no spaces, no initial `:`).

Reviewer 3: Purer pedantry: RFC 4616 requires the encoded bytes to be a UTF-8 string.

IMO warnings about password length should be left to the UI. I could mention it in a non-normative section though.

work-in-progress: true
copyrights:
  -
    name: "Ed Kellett"
    period: "2020"
    email: "e@kellett.im"
  -
    name: "Val Lorentz"
    period: "2021"
    email: "progval+ircv3@progval.net"
---

## Motivation

The lack of a standardized way to register an account has been a source of frustration for many participants
for several years.

This isn't the first attempt to fix it. Unlike the withdrawn `ACC` proposal, this effort aims to be more
appealing to implementors by being severely restricted in scope. The only register-verify flows supported
are those already in use in the wild. The authors hope that this stripped-down solution will serve as the
basis for future organic expansion.

### Capability

This specification adds the `draft/register` capability, whose presence signifies that the server
accepts the `REGISTER` command.

The capability has an optional value, a comma-separated list of key-value pairs; the format is intended
to follow the precedent set by [the multiline draft][multiline].

The defined keys are:

 * `before-connect` - if present, indicates the server supports early registration, so it
   MUST NOT use `FAIL REGISTER COMPLETE_CONNECTION_REQUIRED`

>  * `email-required` - if present, registrations require a valid email address to process

Reviewer 6: Should there be a fail code for when the user sends * instead of an email or is INVALID_EMAIL enough?

Reviewer 4: INVALID_EMAIL should be enough, the client software can work it out based on that and the message should tell the user what went wrong

Clients MUST ignore any value assigned to these keys, and MUST ignore any unknown key.

### Commands

>     REGISTER {<email> | "*"} <password>

Reviewer 2: In case the server supports `before-connect`, what is the "curerent nick"? Should we require that a `NICK` command is sent before `REGISTER`?

Reviewer 4: nice catch. something like this in the list of responses should be sufficient? and/or a line on the `before-connect` key description. it's possible in `before-connect` setups but given those are mostly an experimental use case tossed on top I'd rather not describe this in the 'mainline' spec path.

>     FAIL REGISTER NEED_NICK <message>
> 
> Sent by the server if the client sends `REGISTER` before sending a `NICK` command. This is only possible in setups that advertise the `before-connect` key.

Reviewer 3: I added a `*` argument before `<message>`, for consistency with the other errors.

    
The `REGISTER` command informs the server of a request to register an account named for the current
nick of the requestor.

The `REGISTER` command MAY be sent at any point during the connection that the client has a valid
nickname. If the client sends `REGISTER` before completing connection registration, and receives a
`FAIL REGISTER COMPLETE_CONNECTION_REQUIRED`, it SHOULD make a second attempt after it receives the
welcome message.

    VERIFY <account> <code>
    
The `VERIFY` command completes a registration that required email verification.

### Responses

    REGISTER SUCCESS <account> <message>
    VERIFY SUCCESS <account> <message>
    
Sent by the server when the `REGISTER` or `VERIFY` fully succeeded, and no
further action is needed.
Afterward, the client is assumed to be authenticated to the `<account>`
as if it used SASL.

    REGISTER VERIFICATION_REQUIRED <account> <message>
    
Sent by the server as a response to `REGISTER` when further action is required
to complete registration of the `<account>`, as explain in the human-readable `<message>`.

>     FAIL REGISTER USERNAME_EXISTS <account> <message>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    FAIL REGISTER ACCOUNT_EXISTS <account> <message>
```

Would prevent overloaded terminology (username can also refer to what is also known as the ident).

Sent by the server as a response to `REGISTER` when the client tried to register
while using a nick that is not available as a new account's name
(for example, because someone already registered it).

The server MUST NOT send this response before the client sent a `NICK` command.

The client MAY try registering again later.
Clients should not automatically retry immediately without changing their nickname
or waiting.

    FAIL REGISTER ALREADY_REGISTERED <account> <message>
    FAIL VERIFY ALREADY_REGISTERED <account> <message>

> Sent by the server is the client is already authenticated.

Reviewer 4: s/is/if/
